The Two Tribes
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Jiukiukwe Indians live in some swamps near the 
headwaters of the Orinoco.  They are the most primitive 
people on the face of the earth, and their homeland is so 
isolated and dismal and totally lacking in anything of value 
that they will never be discovered by civilized men.
NEWPARAGRAPH
They do not know the use of fire.  They wear no clothing, 
although on special occasions the married men do drape 
pieces of vines around their necks.  They don't tie them, 
however, for they have not discovered the knot.  They build 
no shelters, and they use no tools, except for unworked 
rocks with which they bang on trees in order to dislodge the 
bark and expose the grubs and worms on which they live.  
Once in a while they find a dead fish floating in the water 
close enough to the shore to be hauled in without having to 
wade out too far.  The waters teem with nasty creatures.  
They celebrate the occasion with a communal meal and a 
religious festival, at the climax of which the married men 
drape the pieces of vine around their necks.  When the party 
is over, they squat happily in the muck and jabber away at 
each other in a language that contains thirty-four separate 
noun declensions, each providing forty-five separate forms, 
fifteen singulars, fifteen duals, and fifteen plurals.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Their verbs are even more complicated.  The conjugations, 
eleven in all, indicate not only the usual things like 
person, number, tense, voice, and mood, but also the 
relationship of the speaker to his listener.  A younger 
brother who is nevertheless not the youngest of his mother's 
sons and who has never found a fish must speak, in the dry 
season, to the eldest of his paternal uncles in verb forms 
that would scandalize the mother-in-law of his youngest 
female cousin, especially in the rainy season.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Jiukiukwe language has an enormous vocabulary in matters 
of interest to the Jiukiukwe.  Although their technology is 
limited to the banging of trees with stones, they have 
scores of words to describe it.  They have separate and 
unrelated words for flat stones, round stones, big stones, 
little stones, sharp stones, and so on, but they have no 
word for "stone."  In the case of trees, the vocabulary is 
even larger, since the trees in which worms or grubs have 
been found are distinguished individually from one another 
by words that amount almost to "names" and are devised as 
needed, while unproductive trees or trees not yet banged 
are named not for any physical attributes but for their 
location with reference to the nearest tree that has 
provided grubs and worms.  The whole system is duplicated 
with utterly unrelated words for fallen trees.  They have, 
however, no word that simply means "tree."
NEWPARAGRAPH
Since they use their knuckles and fingertips for counting, 
they can count up only to thirty-eight.  (They count three 
knuckles on each finger but only two on the thumb.)  
Counting begins with the knuckle at the base of the left 
little finger, moves out to the tip, continues starting with 
the knuckle at the base of the ring finger, and so forth.  
Each hand thus provides nineteen units. Every knuckle and 
every fingertip has its own name, and those names are also 
the names of the numbers.  They have, however, no names for 
the toes, and, while they do speak of the arms and the legs, 
they use one and the same word to name the ankles, knees, 
wrists, and elbows.
NEWPARAGRAPH
"Correct" social behavior among the Jiukiukwe is entirely a 
matter of doing and saying the right thing to the right 
relative under the right circumstances.  Accordingly, the 
vocabulary and grammar of kinship are very large and 
complex.  They have separate words for every possible degree 
of familial relationship.  Not only, for instance, is there 
a special word for the oldest son of your mother's next 
youngest sister, but there is yet another word for him 
should he have reached that estate through the death of some 
older brother.  In either case, he is called by still 
another name until sunset on a day when he has found a dead 
fish.  However, since all the Jiukiukwe are related to one 
another in some precisely nameable way, they have no need 
for words that mean things like "family" or "relative" or 
"kinship."
NEWPARAGRAPH
There is a curious thing about the way they use their verbs.  
They have, of course, both passive and active forms, but 
they consider it a serious breach of etiquette amounting 
almost to sacrilege to use the active form when speaking of 
persons.  In a child, the use of the active voice in the 
first person singular is taken somewhat less seriously, but 
it is still discouraged as a mark of arrogance or 
aggressiveness.  Indeed, their words for "angry" and 
"insane" both contain an element of the ending that goes 
with the first person singular in that conjugation most 
often used by young children.  The do not say: "I am eating 
my worm."  They say rather: "With regard to the worm unto 
me, there is an occasion of eating."  Animals and objects, 
however, are normally found as subjects of active verbs.  
The sun  rises and the worm crawls, subject only to those 
forms available to the person who is saying those things and 
to whom he says them.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Their language sounds terribly complicated, and it is.  It 
is every bit as complicated as English, or any other 
language, for that matter.  All languages are complicated 
beyond hope of complete description.   When it seems to us 
that German is less difficult to learn than Arabic, what we 
have noticed is not that German is less complicated than 
Arabic but that German is more like English.  Speaking his 
language is the most complicated thing a human being does, 
and should he undertake to go even further and learn to 
read and write it, he multiplies one infinitude of 
complications by another.  It is an awesome marvel that 
anyone can do any of these things, never mind do them well.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Nevertheless, billions of people speak and understand a 
language.  In fact, unless there's something wrong, every 
human being there is speaks and understands at least one 
language.  Every member of *homo sapiens* ever born spoke and 
understood a language, unless, of course, he died too soon 
or was in some special way disabled.  The ability to use 
language is included in the meaning of "sapiens".  We have 
no other way of being *sapiens* except through language.  The 
Jiukiukwe may lack barbecue pits and some of our other 
things, but they are every bit as *sapiens* as the inhabitants 
of Manhasset.  They have all it takes.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Still, they are different from the inhabitants of Manhasset 
in many ways.  The material differences come easily to mind, 
since the Manhassetites have not only barbecue pits but much 
more, but there is a much more important difference than 
that.  It is this: In the same circumstance, the 
Manhassetite will say, "I want food" and the Jiukiukwe will 
say, "As for me, there is hunger."  Every other difference 
is because of this difference; this is the difference 
between the Manhassetites and the Jiukiukwe, the difference 
from which all smaller differences flow.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Manhassetites speak a language in which the typical 
statement takes the form of a statement that names a doer 
and his deed.  The most common elaboration also names the 
"object" of his deed.  "I want food" displays exactly the 
typical structure of the most ordinary Manhassetite 
utterance.  The structure may be modified and elaborated in 
many ways, some of them quite extensive and complicated, but 
it remains the enduring skeleton of the typical statement: A 
doer does something, often to something or someone.  The 
continuous reappearance of this structure has taught all 
Manhassetites a particular  view of the world and man's 
place in it.  They understand the world as a place where 
doers do things.  That is why many of them will get raises 
next year and dig deeper barbecue pits.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Jiukiukwe, on the other hand, have been taught by the 
basic structure of their language that *doing* is properly 
the business of the things in the world around them.  Nor do 
they think of themselves, again because of their grammar, as 
the "objects" of the things that are done in the world.  For 
the Jiukiukwe, the inanimate or animal doers of deeds do 
them at most "insofar as he is concerned," as though he 
were, if not always an unaffected bystander, at least no 
more than accidentally related to what happens in the world.  
The Jiukiukwe are just *there*; the world does its things 
around them, sometimes "in their case."
NEWPARAGRAPH
They will not get any raises next year, and you can easily 
see why they have no barbecue pits to enlarge.  
Technological change comes about when somebody does things 
to something.  The Jiukiukwe have always lived, and will 
always live, exactly as they do today.  Their technology 
will not change unless the basic structure of their language 
changes, although it may also be possible that the basic 
structure of their language would change should their 
technology change.  There's no way of knowing which must 
come first, if either, but it seems more likely that the 
language must change before the technology unless some 
imported technology should come along and eventually force a 
change in the language.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Imagine that some particularly eccentric or mildly demented 
Jiukiukwe should develop the rude habit of speaking in the 
active and saying things like "I will find worms."  He has 
now announced, in the Jiukiukwe way of thinking, some 
purported fact about the world and has at the same time 
subjected himself to considerable social disapproval.  If 
he's to get back into the good graces of his older sister's 
father-in-law, and of everybody else, he had damn well 
better come up with the worms.  The more the better.  Then 
his arrogant statement might be re-understood and perhaps 
accepted indeed as a statement of fact about the world.  In 
desperation, he might well discover that you can find more 
worms by prying off the bark with a sharp-edged stone than 
by banging the tree till the bark falls off.  It might occur 
to him that some sharp stones are easier to hold and 
manipulate than others.  Remember, he's going to work hard; 
they're all waiting for him to find worms and thus justify a 
statement in which he spoke of himself as one might speak of 
the sun or the moon.  That's serious.  It won't be long 
before he finds an obviously broken stone that works very 
well, and then it will come to him that he might bang some 
of those less efficient round stones together until *they* 
break and turn into good worm-diggers.  Out of the active 
voice, a technology will be born.  Before long, his 
relatives, noticing how plump and healthy he looks, will 
learn to copy both his magics, his verbs as well as his 
stones, and that will be the end of civilization as the 
Jiukiukwe know it.
NEWPARAGRAPH
When a Manhassetite faces a problem, he asks, drawing upon 
the basic structure of his language, "What shall I do?"  He 
looks for an action to perform.  The Jiukiukwe is unlikely 
even to think that he faces a problem, since that itself is 
a case of an agent doing something to something.  
Significantly, the Jiukiukwe language has no word for 
"problem."  "Problem" can be thought of only in a language 
that can also think of "solution," and the relationship 
between the two is understood through a grammar that permits 
the idea of doers doing things.  The Jiukiukwe do not think 
of a shortage of worms as a "problem," a condition whose 
very name suggests that somebody might do something about 
something.  They think of it as a "badness," "a state of few 
worms in relation to us," a condition in the world that just 
happens to affect them.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Although the Jiukiukwe seem to pay a heavy price for their 
grammar, they also take from it some advantages not 
available to the Manhassetites.  They have, for instance, no 
warfare, because warfare not only arises from the willed 
deeds of agents but is itself a matter of willing agents 
doing things to each other.  In any case, they don't even 
have the individual analogues of war: hatred, envy, and 
competitiveness.  The Manhassetites are a small subgroup of 
a large, warlike tribe, which is, in turn, only one of many 
tribes loosely associated into an enormous culture in which 
warfare is a permanent institution and even the root of much 
of its most vigorous enterprise.  Naturally, hatred, envy, 
and competition are almost universal among Manhassetites.  
For the Jiukiukwe there is essentially only one doer of 
things, and that is something like the world itself, which 
does what it does neither out of will nor out of design.  It 
has no intentions; it just happens.  For the Manhassetites, 
there are as many possible doers as there are members of the 
species or nouns in the language, and their grammar 
encourages them to envision a universe in which conflict of 
intentions is simply a part of the fabric of reality. 
NEWPARAGRAPH
An idea of reality is what we devise and perceive through 
our language; reality itself is probably something else 
again.  Both the Jiukiukwe and the Manhassetites fancy that 
they know the real world, but what they know is some 
presumed order of things symbolized and suggested by the 
vocabularies and structures of their languages.  They live 
by grammar; all men do.  That's why the grammars of all 
languages are so terribly complicated.  There are no people, 
however "primitive," who see the world as a simple place.  
In fact, the more "primitive" they are, the more complicated 
and elaborate the assumed underlying structure of reality in 
their languages.  Furthermore, there seem to be no people 
who are content to have a language in which to consider only 
the world of sensible experience, and all languages are 
anchored mostly in other worlds rather than the one that we 
experience here and now.
NEWPARAGRAPH
It's fun, and safe, to speculate on the origins of language.  
What makes it safe is that no dreary scholar will ever come 
along with the facts to prove what a fool you've been.  If 
you speculate on Milton's toilet-training or the social 
structures of the leaf-cutting ants, the very next mail will 
bring you a fat journal containing the definitive findings.  
The mystery of the origin of language is the linguist's 
equivalent of the physicist's mystery of the nature of the 
universe, if any, before the big bang.  The evidence we need 
is utterly inaccessible, and there's no way to draw valid 
conclusions from the evidence we have.  Even experimentation 
is impossible.  The story has been told, for instance, of 
several famous despots, that they had some newborn children 
raised from infancy by deaf-mute nursemaids to see what 
language they would speak.  It turned out that children thus 
raised do not, after all, grow up speaking Hebrew, the 
supposed language of God and the angels.  They grow up, of 
course, speaking nothing.  Learning your language seems not 
at all analogous to developing one.  Such an experiment 
would tell us nothing about the origin of language even if 
we could keep it going for thousands of years and watch 
generation after generation.  The brains and even the vocal 
apparatus of those in whom language began were significantly 
different from ours, and our isolated infants would begin 
with an *evolved* propensity for language.  It would surely 
be an interesting experiment, but it would tell us nothing 
about *the* origin of language.
NEWPARAGRAPH
It is just as much fun, however, and somewhat more useful to 
speculate about something that was probably *not* the origin 
of language, although we sometimes carelessly think that it 
might have been.  There is a kind of everyday, commonsense 
notion about the origin of language that sticks in our heads 
and causes important misunderstandings.  It is, of course, 
the notion that language must have begun as a way of naming 
things in the world in which we live.  Those are exactly the 
things that need no naming.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The world in which we live is very tiny; it as as tiny for 
the Manhassetites as it is for the Jiukiukwe.  That world 
can only be the world of immediate sensory experience, the 
world we can perceive in whatever way we can in this moment, 
which is now gone.  The world of sensory experience is so 
tiny and so brief that, in a sense, we can't *do* anything 
in it; we can only *be* in it.  The world that *was* before 
this moment is immeasurably big, and so too the world that 
will be, to say nothing of the world that might have been or 
the world that may yet be or, the root of morality, the 
world that someone thinks *should* be.  It is the main 
business of language to evoke such worlds.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The speechless animals live entirely in the world that is.  
It is sometimes said that some of the animals have a 
"language" with which they send signals to one another about 
the world that is.  That's nonsense.  That we can 
uncritically accept such nonsense is testimony to the power 
of grammar.  "Animals send signals" is a satisfying 
appearance of the basic structure of our language, and it 
harmonizes sweetly with our concomitant idea that the world 
is a place where most of what happens can be understood as 
the act of an agent who is doing something.  The animals are 
not agents committing acts.  When a zebra out on the edge of 
the herd sniffs a lion in the tall grass, he does not say to 
himself in any fashion, "I had better tell the others."  
(Nor would you, for that matter.)  He simply does what is 
appropriate for a successful zebra to do under those 
circumstances.  His startled neighbors, startled by what he 
does whether they sniff the lion or not, do likewise.  
That's part of how they got to be grown-up zebras in the 
first place.  The zebras who are slow to startle have a way 
of dropping out of the herd early in life.  In a moment, the 
whole herd is in flight, but it cannot be properly said that 
a zebra has sent a message.  It would be more accurate to 
say that the zebras have caught something from one another.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Human beings, too, catch things from one another, and 
usually with no use of language at all.  We can imagine the 
hominid and speechless precursors of man wandering not far 
from the zebras.  What need could they possibly have had to 
call the lion by a name?  Just as surely as the zebras, they 
must have reacted appropriately to a whiff of lion.  If they 
hadn't, they wouldn't have been around long enough to 
provide a future for all of us.  What need, for that matter, 
would they have had to name the food they were eating or 
seeking, the food of the world of experience?  Would they 
have had to be "told" to feed the young?  To sleep at night?  
No animals need names for such things, because they do not 
have to "tell" of them.  Such things, in their seasons, are 
just *there*.  Language is for telling, not for naming.  
Nobody needs to be told that he is getting wet in the rain 
or that he is eating a banana.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Think what happens when you encounter an unexpected snake, 
the usual kind.  There is no word in your head, no language 
at all, in the instant of the automatic recoil.  *Then* you 
say, if only in your head, "Oh, a snake."  The word "snake" 
makes you feel better, because it opens the gates for many 
other words.  It occurs to you, because you have the words 
*in which* it occurs to you, that most snakes found in 
Manhasset are harmless and unaggressive and that you're not 
really in danger [to a Texan, this passage's portability seems 
somewhat limited].  You have transformed a creature in the world 
of sense experience into a whole system of related ideas in a 
world that is not the world of sense experience.  That 
little chill was real, and, for a moment, it remains, but 
you are not in flight.  You are in another world, the world 
where snakes are made of discourse, not blood and bones and 
teeth.  Your language gives you access to that world.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Jiukiukwe are also afraid of snakes, and they have 
better reasons than we.  The swamps are full of them, and 
none of them is harmless.  Members of the tribe sometimes 
die of snakebite, and little children out looking for dead 
fish have occasionally been swallowed by anacondas.  In the 
company of an anaconda, any forest animal is afraid, just 
like any Jiukiukwe.  The difference, though, is that the 
Jiukiukwe have a language so that they don't have to wait to 
be afraid until they actually find themselves in the company 
of an anaconda.  They can be afraid ahead of time.  In 
language they remember the anaconda of the past and take 
thought for the anaconda of the future.  *Those* big snakes 
are not around to inspire fear; they are in other worlds.  
Language evokes them.
NEWPARAGRAPH
The Jiukiukwe use a part of the word for anaconda to 
describe those places where the snakes have been seen in the 
past.  With the appropriate verb ending, of course, the same 
word is used to shoo children away from things.  This is 
actually a form of technology, or, at least, social 
engineering, since it makes the children anxious and more 
than ordinarily observant when they are in places that carry 
that name.  In spite of the obvious fact that there aren't 
*always* anacondas to be found in those places, the language 
behaves as though there were.  Some world other than the 
world of experience is projected by the use of an adjective.  
When we can project such an alternative world, we can also 
find, sometimes, a way of bringing it home and thus changing 
the world of immediate experience.
NEWPARAGRAPH
In language, man can project a world in which he doesn't get 
soaked by every rain that falls.  In that language, he can 
also reconstruct some past world in which he found himself 
under an overhanging cliff that kept him out of the rain.  
He can start looking for cliffs.  He can eventually project 
a world in which some artificial cliff keeps him out of the 
rain and provides him with a quiet, comfortable afternoon in 
which to refine the invention of architecture.  Such 
projections require language, not merely the naming of 
things.
NEWPARAGRAPH
People who have merely come up with a word for "wet" can do 
nothing more than stand around in the rain announcing to 
each other a sorry fact that needs no announcing.  It won't 
help them, either, to come up with a word for "dry."  What 
they need is a way to think about "dry" even while they are 
getting wet, a way to relate the two even when only one is 
present in the world of experience.  They need "wet could be 
dry."  That's grammar.
NEWPARAGRAPH
A collection of names for things in the world, however 
large, does not make a language.  A language is only 
incidental in the business of naming things.  Its important 
business is to explore the way in which things are, or 
perhaps might be, related to one another.  Building a 
shelter takes more than words for "dry" and "cliff."  It 
needs an idea of relationship, the idea of "under."  Then it 
needs another relationship, one that might be understood by 
something like "dry under *made* cliff."  To that, some 
designing mind must add not only "tomorrow" but "all 
tomorrows."  "Cliff" names something in the palpable world, 
and "dry" names not exactly a thing in the world but at 
least a physical condition.  Those other words, however, 
"made" and "tomorrow" and "all," name nothing in this world.  
They name some ways in which things can be related to each 
other.
NEWPARAGRAPH
How such words came to be is a profound mystery, every bit 
as vexatious as the mystery surrounding the birth of 
language itself.  Perhaps, even probably, they are the same 
mystery, for there certainly could be no such thing as 
language without them.  The ability to discern and name the 
relationships suggested, for instance, by words like "so" 
and "if" was more important to the history of man than fire 
or the wheel, neither of which would have been ours without 
"so" and "if."
NEWPARAGRAPH
Even many of the words that we think of as the names of 
things in the world are really descriptions of relationships 
that exist only in the world of language.  The Jiukiukwe, 
remember, have no word for "stone," since for them stones 
*as* stones have no interest.  To them, what we would call a 
pile of stones is a pile of tree-bangers, a name not 
intended to point at the things themselves but to their 
place in the life of the Jiukiukwe.  To some other crowd of 
savages the same pile of stones might well be a pile of 
"weapons."  Stones are indeed found lying around on the 
ground, but weapons and tree-bangers are found in systems of 
culture.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Similarly, when the Jiukiukwe have a word for every possible 
family relationship, it's not because they are naming 
precisely this or that person who actually exists before 
their very eyes.  They are naming *places* in a complicated 
social design, not people.  The social system exists in 
their minds, but it can exist there only because the 
language sets it forth for the mind to understand.  They 
would say that *we* are primitive in our appreciation of 
family life because we can name so few relationships, just 
as we say that they are primitive because they use the same 
word for "knee" and "elbow."  From their point of view, we 
are just that backward because we call all the sons of our 
mothers by the one word "brother."
NEWPARAGRAPH
People who can remember only one line of Wittgenstein are 
likely to remember his terse suggestion that we ought to 
keep our mouths shut about matters whereof we can tell 
nothing.  This dictum provides some interesting corollaries.  
One of them is that in matters where we *do* keep our mouths 
shut, we can have no knowledge.  If, for instance, there 
should exist something that a language has no way of 
expressing, then that thing does not "exist" for the culture 
that speaks the language.  For all their compulsive 
attention to their relatives, the Jiukiukwe, as you know, 
have no word for "family."  They are all related.  Since we 
are not, we need the word "family" as a term of distinction.  
In like fashion, every word isolates the thing named from 
everything else that there is, whether it be the name of 
some object in the world of experience or some idea of 
relationship in the world of language.  In effect, 
everything that gets a name gets it because we can perceive 
that everything else is *not* that thing.  Even the simple 
abstraction "stones," therefore, is just as much a 
recognition of a relationship as "tree-bangers" is for the 
Jiukiukwe.  Of those relationships that we do not, for one 
reason or another, perceive, we cannot speak, and thus we 
can have no knowledge.
NEWPARAGRAPH
Our knowledge is made up of the stories that we can tell, 
stories that must be told in the language that we know.  
(Even mathematics is a "language" that states propositions 
and tells stories.  It's a very elaborate form of "play" 
language.  That's why it's such fun for those who speak it 
well.)  Where we can tell no story, we can have no 
knowledge.  That's probably why we all have amnesia about 
infancy.  As infants, we hadn't the language with which to 
transform the world of experience into the more durable form 
of knowledge and memory.  When our forebears had no language 
and no knowledge, the best they could do was to sniff the 
lion in the long grass.  That wasn't too bad, of course, and 
thousands of other kinds of creatures have done well with 
nothing more.  But when we found language and became *Homo 
sapiens* (how could those events have been other than 
simultaneous?), we could tell ourselves the story of the 
last time we passed this way and lost Gbloog to a lion.  
Even more important, we could invent the story of the *next* 
time and either be prepared for a lion or decide to take the 
long way around.  To deal with the lion here and now, we 
don't need language, just a good nose and strong legs.  
Language can deal with the lion that was and the lion that 
will be, even the lion that *may* be.  Creatures who can 
speak can survive even if they have bad noses and short, 
stumpy legs.
NEWPARAGRAPH
In those times, linguistic ability must have brought an even 
better hope of survival than physical prowess.  The silly 
boob who just couldn't get into his head the implications of 
the future conditional, accordingly, was just a hair more 
likely to be eaten by lions than his lame but more 
intellectual brother.  A new element had appeared in the 
process of natural selection.  Nowadays, we notice that 
there is very little danger of being eaten by lions.  
Nevertheless, the destiny that waits in the long grass for 
the silly boob who can't get his language straight is not a 
good one, although, of course, it does last longer than the 
business of being eaten by a lion.  It's more like being 
eaten by a worm, slowly.
NEWPARAGRAPH

from Richard Mitchell, "Less Than Words Can Say".  Little, 
Brown, Boston, 1979.
